#summary 意味のないFAQ / FAQs, mostly useless
#labels Phase-Support

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

= JP =

== Cicindela の名前の由来は ? ==

Cicindela はハンミョウの英語名/学名です。旅人に驚き，これを避けようとして結果的に人の行く先へ先へと跳んでいく習性があることから，「ミチオシエ」という別名があります。

旅人の行方を示すということと，レコメンデーションとの関連性からこの名前をとりました。

また，そもそも Cicindela は道を示しているようにみえるが，実際にその道を作っているのは他ならぬ旅人自身なのだ，という示唆もこの名前には含まれています。


== Cicindela の発音は ? ==

英語的にはシシンデラのようですが，安部公房の「砂の女」の元になった短編に「チチンデラ・ヤパナ」というのがあって (ラテン語読み ?) どちらかというとこちらの呼び方を推奨しています。何か聞かれたときに、きみ，安部公房を知らないのか，とか呟きながら眼鏡を上下させることにより文科系女子にモテモテ、といったあたりを主目的としています。

が，ちちんでらという響きが営業的に色々アレだといった意見が多く寄せられたため，会社的にはシシンデラということになっておりますのでよろしくおねがいします。

= EN =

== where does the name "cicindela" come from ? ==

Cicindela, or tiger beetles, are also called "path tellers" in Japanese.  Since they tend keep on landing ahead of  traveller's paths as they try to jump away from the nearing footsteps. 

Web site visitors are also travellers, seeking desperately for something new. Recommendation engines will then be their path-tellers.

We would also like to mention that, although it looks as if Cicindela is leading the traveller, it always is the traveller himself who is actually making the way.

(Some people might also recall the literature "Cicindela Japana" by Kobo Abe. As for my personal recommendation, don't bother reading it, it's dull. Try Kangaroo Notebook instead.)

== what happened to cicindela "1" ? ==

We messed up the repository and do not even want you to look at the revision history.

== how do you pronounce "cicindela" ? ==

That's what we wish to know. We bet it is "cis-sin-del-la" in English. Is it "chi-chin-del-la" in latin ?